[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING] [CLICKING]
CASEY RODRIGUEZ: All
right, so last time we
proved the following theorem--
that if I have a
convergent series,
and this implies
that the limit as n
goes to infinity of
x sub n equals 0.
So a natural question is, as a
beginning advanced math class,
does the converse hold?
Is this a two-way street
or a one-way street?
So if the individual terms in
this series converges to 0,
does this imply that
the series converges?
And I'm sure you answered
this question in some form
in a previous calculus class.
And the answer to
this question is no.
So what's the counterexample?
It's the so-called
harmonic series,
which corresponds to our
favorite sequence which
converges to 0.
So we'll state
this as a theorem--
the series sum from n equals
1 to infinity of 1 over n
does not converge.
So how are we going
to prove this theorem?
We'll prove this
theorem by showing
a sequence of partial sums.
Some sequence of partial sums
for this guy does not converge.
So if it were to converge, then
the sequence of partial sums
converges, and therefore, every
subsequence of partial sums
converge.
So what's the strategy?
We're going to show that
there exists a subsequence
of partial sums, here s n k--
let's make this m k--
so remember, the
partial sums are simply
summing up the first--
so the index here is m sub
k, so the first m sub k
terms, 1 over n, diverges.
And this is enough to show
that the full series doesn't
converge again.
Because if it did converge,
the sequence of partial sums
converges, and therefore, every
subsequence of partial sums
converges.
So if we're able to show there
exists a subsequence which
diverges, then we're done.
In fact, what we're
going to do is
something a little bit stronger.
We're going to show
that there exists
a subsequence of partial
sums which not only diverges
but is unbounded.
And therefore, the entire
sequence of partial sums
is unbounded.
So if we're able to show there
exists a subsequence which
is unbounded, then the entire
sequence of partial sums
is unbounded, so
it can't converge.
Because remember,
convergent sequences
imply bounded sequences.
So we're going to look at
when m sub k is dyadic.
And for some reason, I
switched indices from k
to l in my notes, so instead
we're going to go from m sub l.
So let l be a natural
number, and we'll
consider the partial sum
corresponding to adding up
the first 2 to the l terms.
Now, you may ask,
why 2 to the l?
Why not 3 to the l?
Well, 4 to the l will be
a subsequence of that,
but 2 to the l is-- you
could do 3 to the l,
you could do 5 to
the l, but 2 to the l
is sufficient for our purposes.
So what we're going
to do is we're
going to take this
partial sum and bound it
from below by something
which is quite large.
So first off, all of
these partial sums
are bounded from below by 0.
They're a sum of
non-negative terms.
So we write s 2 to the l.
This is equal to
1 plus 1/2 plus--
and I'm going to put parentheses
around that-- plus 1/3,
plus 1/4, plus 1/5, plus
1/6, plus 1/7, plus 1/8.
So how I'm grouping these terms
is I'm grouping them according
to whether the denominator
falls between a power of 2
and the next power of
2, and then plus dot,
dot, dot, 2 to the l minus 1
plus 1 plus 1 over 2 to the l.
Now I can write
this partial sum.
So I've grouped terms this way.
What is this in terms
of precise symbols?
This is 1 plus sum from lambda
equals 1 to l, sum from n
equals 2 to the lambda minus 1
plus 1 2 to the lambda 1 over n
So.
These lambdas are now
parameterizing what power of 2
I'm at.
So when lambda equals
1, I'm at this block.
When lambda equals
2, I'm at this block,
and lambda equals l,
I'm at this block.
And then I'm
summing up the terms
that have denominator between
that power and the next of 2.
So I have this, and now I
bound that sum from below.
Because again,
I'm trying to show
that this subsequence of
partial sums is unbounded.
So I bound it from below.
I sum from lambda equals
1 to l, sum from n
equals 2 to the lambda minus
1 plus 1, 2 to the lambda.
And now for each of these,
n is between 2 to the--
so this should be
2 to the lambda.
Now for n between these
two numbers, 1 over n
is always bigger
than or equal to when
I plug in the biggest bound
here, 2 to the lambda.
And now I just have
a sum, so over n,
but there's no n in this term.
So I just add up all the number
of terms in a given block.
And this is equal to--
so first I have 1 over 2 to
the lambda coming from here,
and then sum from n equals 2
to the lambda minus 1 plus 1, 2
to the lambda times 1.
So again, I'm going
a little slow here.
And this is just
equal to l 1 over 2
to the lambda times
the number of terms
I have here, which is
2 to the lambda minus 2
to the lambda minus 1 plus
1, so this minus this plus 1.
So this is equal to 1
plus lambda equals 1 to l,
1 over 2 lambda.
And so this 1 cancels
with this one.
And then I have 2 the lambda
minus 1, which I can bring out.
And so this is just 1.
And I get 1 plus sum from
lambda equals 1 to l.
And this 2 to the lambda cancels
with this 2 to the lambda,
and I'm left with just a 1/2.
And this is equal to--
now remember, there's
no sum here in lambda,
so this is just 1 plus l over 2.
So what did we do?
We basically showed that
each of these blocks
is bounded from below by a 1/2.
That's this term that we
get right here in the end.
And we can see this if we just
go through the first three
terms which I have written here.
So 1/2 is clearly
bounded below by a 1/2.
1/3 plus 1/4 is bounded
below by 1/4 plus 1/4,
because 1/3 is bigger than that.
So 1/4 plus 1/4 is a 1/2.
If I look at this next
block, that's 1 over 5
is bigger than or
equal to 1 over 8.
So is 1 over 6.
So is 1 over 7.
So this sum is bigger than
or equal to 1/8 plus 1/8
plus 1/8 plus 1/8, which equals
1/2, plus, and then so on.
So maybe I should have
said that before I went
into the actual computation.
But in the end, we get that
this subsequence of partial sums
s to the 2l.
So let me just summarize.
This is bigger than or
equal to l plus 2 over 2.
And as l gets very large,
this thing gets very large.
So this implies s to the
2l, this subsequence,
equals 1 to infinity
is unbounded,
which implies that
the full subsequence,
or the full sequence of
partial sums, is unbounded.
And therefore, the sequence of
partial sums does not converge.
And therefore, that
series does not converge.
So we see that the converse
does not hold for that question
or for that theorem.
I will just make a very
passing mention to the fact
that there are fields for
which that does hold--
so not ordered
fields, because again,
ordered fields with the
least upper bound property
have to be R, and
therefore, we've
just shown that the converse
of that theorem does not hold.
But in fact, if you look at
the so-called p-adic numbers,
they do have this property
that if the sequence of terms
converges to 0, then
the series converges.
But we will never
see p-adic numbers.
I just wanted to do a little
lip service to that fact--
that there are at
least fields of numbers
that do have this property.
So we had a theorem
about limits of sequences
and how they interact
with algebraic operations.
This naturally implies
a theorem about series.
So let alpha be in
R, and let's suppose
we have two convergent series.
Then if I look at the
series alpha x n plus y n--
so the terms of my
new series are alpha
times x sub n plus y sub n--
this is a convergent series.
And the sum of this series
is equal to what you expect.
So the sum of the series alpha
x n plus y n is equal to alpha
times the sum of x n's
plus the sum of y n's.
So this theorem follows
essentially kind of immediately
from what we did for sequences.
Partial sums satisfy-- if I
look at sum stopping at m,
alpha x n plus y n, now just by
the linearity of just adding up
finitely many terms--
I'm not going to put something
down below because I really
don't need to--
this is equal to alpha times
the partial sum of x sub n
plus the partial sum
corresponding to y sub n.
And so we're assuming this
sequence of partial sums
converges and this sequence
of partial sums converges.
So therefore, this term on
the right-hand side converges,
which implies the
left side converges.
So by the linear properties
of limits, namely
that the limit of the sum
is the sum of the limits.
And multiplication just by
fixed real numbers commutes
with taking limits, so
we get that limit as m
goes to infinity,
so the partial sum
corresponding to the new
series equals alpha plus--
and that's just alpha
times sum x n plus sum y n.
And that's the end.
So now, remember we had
certain sequences which
we could tell whether
they converge,
a little bit easier than
just an arbitrary sequence.
A couple of examples of--
at least one example
of a sequence
we could decide if it
converges kind of easily
is a monotone
increasing sequence.
And we showed that a monotone
increasing sequence converges
if and only if it's bounded.
So we're going to use this to
be able to say something about
series now-- not
sequences, but series--
that have non-negative
terms that I'm adding up.
Because the partial
sums corresponding
to a series that has
non-negative terms
form a monotone
increasing sequence.
And that's not too hard to show.
So this is the
following theorem.
So now, we're going to discuss
a little bit about sequences
or look at sequences which
have non-negative terms.
So the theorem is
the following--
if for all n a natural number,
x then is bigger than or equal
to 0-- so all these
terms are non-negative--
then the series
converges if and only
if the sequence of
partial sums s sub m--
is bounded.
And again, the
way we see this is
just that when these
terms are non-negative,
the sequence of partial
sums is monotone.
So here's the proof.
It's quite easy.
So we have for all
n a natural number--
make that m-- if I look at s
sub m plus 1, this is equal to--
so this is the m
plus 1 partial sum--
from m equals 1 to
m plus 1, x of n,
this is equal to sum from n
equals m x n plus x n plus 1.
And now the x m plus 1
term is not negative.
We're assuming all the
terms are non-negative.
So this right-hand side--
this is certainly bigger
than or equal to sum from n
equals 1 to m of x n,
and that equals s m.
So just summarizing for
all natural numbers m,
the s m plus 1 is bigger
than or equal to s m.
If I just keep adding
non-negative things,
the partial sums
are getting bigger.
So the partial
sums is a monotone.
So maybe I should've stated
this slightly differently just
so that you don't
think this is part
of one of the if and only ifs.
I mean, this is the
assumption that we
have for this whole statement.
Suppose this, so the conclusion
is that this converges if
and only if the sequence
of partial sums is bounded.
So based on the assumption that
all the terms are non-negative,
we see that the
sequence of partial sums
is monotone increasing.
That's why what we
proved for sequences--
every monotone increasing
sequence converges if
and only if it's bounded.
And that's it.
Now, not every series we look
at does have non-negative terms.
But we can always form a
certain series from those terms
to make a new series with
non-negative terms, which
gives us information
about the original series.
What am I going on about?
And look at the convergence
properties of that new series.
So we have the
following definition--
that a series
converges absolutely,
or we say we have
absolute convergence,
if the series formed by
taking the absolute values
of these terms, if
this series converges.
So what I was trying to
get at before I stated
this definition is that
absolute convergence
implies usual convergence.
If I had this series
converging absolutely,
then the original
series converges.
Now, before I
prove this theorem,
let me prove a
little, small theorem.
I can't remember if I gave
it for an assignment or not,
but it's essentially
a triangle inequality
for however many terms you like.
So we'll prove this
theorem in just a minute.
But first, let me prove
the following theorem--
that if m is bigger than or
equal to 2, and x1 up to x m
are in R, then sum
from n equals 1
to m x n, take the
absolute value of this sum,
this is less than or equal
to sum from n equals 1 to m
of the absolute value.
When m equals 2, this
is just the usual form
of the triangle inequality.
So m equals 2--
this is just saying x1
plus x2 is always less
than or equal to x1 plus x2,
which is just the triangle
inequality.
But typically how life
works, at least in analysis,
if you can do it for
two things, then you
can do it for n things or
m things, in this case,
by induction.
And so that's how we're
going to prove this.
So we'll prove first prove
this triangle inequality
by induction.
Now, in the induction
proofs we've done so far,
little n is our thing
that we're inducting on.
In this statement, m is
the thing, induction on m.
So let's look at the base
case, which is m equals 2.
So then this is just
the triangle inequality
for two real numbers that
we've already proved before--
x1 plus x2 in absolute
value is always
less than or equal to sum
of x1 plus the sum of x2--
I mean, the sum of
absolute value of x1
and the absolute value of x2.
So the base case is fine.
So now we do the inductive step.
So I'll assume the statement
that I want to prove.
Usually, I use m, but now
I'll go to the next letter
l, going in reverse
alphabetical order.
Suppose if x1, x l in R.
So let's actually, instead of
just restating all that, just--
I'll just [INAUDIBLE] star.
So suppose star
holds for m equals l.
And now we want
to prove that star
holds for m equals l plus 1.
Now we want to show star
Let x1 up to x l
plus 1 be in R. Then
if I look at the sum from
n equals 1 to l plus 1 x n,
this is equal to sum from n
equals 1 to l x n plus x l
plus 1 in absolute value.
By the usual triangle
inequality for two terms,
this is less than or equal
to sum from n equals 1 to l
of x n in absolute value plus
the absolute value of x l
plus 1 by usual
triangle inequality.
And now this term,
since I'm assuming m
equals l holds, so the
m equals l case says
this is less than or equal
to sum from n equals 1 to l
of x n plus x l plus
1 in absolute value.
So this is by
inductive hypothesis.
And this is just equal to sum
from n equals 1 to l plus 1
x n.
so we've proven the case
for now m equals l plus 1.
And that concludes the proof
of this generalized triangle
inequality with arbitrary
number of terms.
So let's get back to
proving this theorem,
that absolute convergence
implies convergence.
So we'll do that by proving that
absolute convergence implies
that the series is Cauchy.
So proof-- and this
is of the theorem
just before this
theorem, we proved
that absolute convergence
implies usual convergence.
So we will prove that in
fact, this series is Cauchy,
assuming absolute convergence.
And from last time, we had
approved the statement,
or at least this followed from
the statement for sequences,
that a Cauchy series converges--
that a series is Cauchy if
and only if it converges.
So we have to prove that
the series is Cauchy.
Remember, this means for
all epsilon positive,
there exists a
natural number m such
that for all l bigger
than m bigger than
or equal to M, if I look at the
sum from n equals m plus 1 to l
of x n, this is
less than epsilon.
So let epsilon be positive.
So since we're assuming that
the series is absolutely
convergent, this
implies that this series
with absolute values
here is also Cauchy.
So that means that there
exists a natural number m sub 0
such that for all L bigger than
m bigger than or equal to M
sub 0, if I look at the
sum of absolute values
from m plus 1 to l, this
is less than epsilon.
Now, this should have an
absolute value on the outside,
but this is a sum of
non-negative terms,
so the absolute
value can be removed.
You can essentially
see where we're
going based on what's
written on the board--
what we want to prove,
and what we know,
and this triangle inequality.
So choose M to be M sub 0.
Then if l is bigger than m is
bigger than or equal to M, then
the absolute value of the
sum m plus 1 to l sub n--
this is less than or equal
to the sum from n equals
m plus 1 to l of the
absolute values of x sub n
by the theorem we proved
just a minute ago.
And this is less than
epsilon by our choice of M. M
is equal to M0,
and for M0, we have
this inequality right here.
Thus the series is Cauchy,
which implies it converges.
Basically, the
only test you know
for determining when
a series is convergent
is in one of two possibilities.
Either A, it has a
very simple form,
and so all the terms
are non-negative,
but the terms have
a very simple form.
It's the alternating
series test which
we'll discuss in a little bit,
possibly the next lecture.
And then when a series
converges absolutely,
we have a lot of tests for that.
And we'll see that series
which converge absolutely
somehow are not fickle, meaning
I can rearrange the terms
and the rearranged
series will still
converge absolutely, and
converge to the same thing
that the original
series converged to.
So let me just make a brief
comment after this theorem,
we proved that absolute
convergence implies
usual convergence, and
tie-in a little bit
to what I just said there.
So we'll show that
the series sum from 1
to infinity of minus
1 to the n 1 over n--
this converges.
But note that this series
does not converge absolutely.
Because when I take absolute
values, I just get sum of 1
over n, which is the harmonic
series, which we just showed
a few minutes ago is divergent.
So now we're going to move
on to some convergence tests.
Now, when it comes to
convergence tests, what these
all follow from
is basically what
we know about geometric series
and the following comparison
test, although when
I do the proofs
of the other convergence
tests, I won't actually
state that I'm using
the comparison test.
But that's kind of what's
really getting used.
So the first test we have
is the comparison test.
And the statement
is the following--
suppose for all n
a natural number,
we're looking at
non-negative terms
with one smaller than the other.
Then the conclusion is if
the bigger one converges,
this implies that the
smaller one converges.
And if the smaller
one diverges, this
implies that the
bigger one diverges.
How we're going
to prove this is--
so we're dealing with terms
that are non-negative,
so we'll use this theorem about
a series of non-negative terms.
So we use that
theorem, and we proved
that a series of non-negative
terms converges if
and only if the sequence
of partial sums is bounded.
So if this series
converges, this
implies that the
sequence of partial sums
is bounded, which implies--
that means that there exists
a non-negative number such
that for all natural numbers
m, sum from n equals 1 to m
of y sub n is less
than or equal to B.
But this immediately implies
that since all the x n's
are less than or
equal to the y n's, we
get that the n-th partial sum
corresponding to the x n's,
which is less than or equal
to the n-th partial sum
for the y n's, is also less
than or equal to B for all m.
So sequence of partial sums
corresponding to the x n's is
bounded.
And therefore, by the
theorem we proved,
which I think I have erased
already, the series converges.
Now, proving 2 is essentially--
it's kind of the same thing,
except the inequalities
go the other way.
And the x n's are getting
bigger, which implies the y n's
are also getting--
or the partial sums
corresponding to the x n's is
getting bigger implying
that the partial sums
corresponding to the y n's
are also getting bigger.
So now 2, if this
series diverges,
then this implies that
partial sums is unbounded.
we'll now prove
that this implies
that the partial sums
corresponding to the y n's are
unbounded.
Now, remember what it means
for a sequence to be bounded
is that there exists a
non-negative number B such
that for all m I
have that bound.
So to say it's unbounded
means that for all B
there exists a little m bigger
than or equal to capital M
such that that
inequality is reversed.
So let me put here in a box
what this actually means.
Again, this means that for all
B bigger than or equal to 0,
there exists m,
a natural number,
so that y n equals 1 to m is
bigger than or equal to B.
That's what this means.
So this is a for
all statement, so I
have to be able to prove it for
every B, that B be bigger than
or equal to 0.
Now, since we know that the
partial sums corresponding
to the x n's is
unbounded, this implies
that there exists an
m, a natural number,
such that the sum
from n equals 1 to m
of x n is bigger
than or equal to B.
So let me say again, to show
its unbounded I should really
have--
so for a sequence
to be unbounded,
I should have an
absolute value here
is bigger than or equal to
B. But all of these terms
are non-negative,
and therefore, I
can remove the absolute values,
and the same thing here.
So there exists a natural
number m so that I have this.
And so we put a little m0 there
because we have to somehow show
there exists a little m.
Choose m to be this m0.
So now, if we look at the
partial sums for the y n's,
this is bigger
than or equal to--
because m equals
m0, it's this term,
which is bigger than
or equal to B. Thus,
this proves the partial sums
corresponding to the y n
is unbounded.
And therefore, this
series diverges.
So let's use the
comparison theorem
to consider series
like 1 over n p-series,
and prove when they do converge.
So theorem-- for
p, a real number,
sum n equals 1 to
infinity 1 over n to the p
converges if and only
if p is bigger than 1.
So for the proof, why
does the series converging
imply p has to be bigger than 1?
I'll do this by contradiction.
So suppose 1 over n to the p
equals 1 to infinity converges.
So we'll do the proof
by contradiction
that p has to be bigger than 1.
Suppose p is less
than or equal to 1.
Then 1 over n to the p--
where p is less
than or equal to 1,
this is bigger than
or equal to 1 over n.
And this implies,
since 1 over n--
since the series
corresponding to 1 over n--
diverges implies that the
series corresponding to 1 over n
to the p diverges by the
comparison test, which
is a direct contradiction
to what we're assuming,
that the series converges.
So this must be false.
p must be bigger than 1.
So we've shown that if
this series converges,
then p has to be bigger than 1.
So now let's prove
the other direction
and suppose p is bigger
than 1, and prove
that the p series, 1 over
n to the p, converges.
So the way we're
going to do this
is kind of how we showed
that the harmonic series is
divergent.
So what we're going
to do is first,
we're going to
show that there is
a subsequence of partial
sums corresponding
to this guy that is bounded.
So remember, to prove that this
converges, this converges if
and only if the sequence
of partial sums is bounded.
And what we're going to
first do towards that
is prove that there is a
subsequence of partial sums
which is bounded.
So we make a first claim that
the sequence of partial sums--
so s 2 to the k, this is sum
from n goes 1 to 2 to the k
of 1 over n to the p,
so k a natural number--
this partial sum is
bounded by a fixed number
depending on p, 1 plus 1 minus
2 to the minus p minus 1.
In other words, this subsequence
of partial sums corresponding
to s 2 to the k is bounded.
So again, we do this by
grouping these terms according
to which power of 2
the denominator is
between, and then
estimate from above now,
rather than from below like we
did for the harmonic series.
So we have s 2 to
the k equals 1.
So again, we're
grouping these terms
according to where they fall.
So just write this
out one more time--
this is equal to 1 plus 1/2 to
the p plus 1 over 3 to the p
plus 1 over 4 to the p plus 1
over 5 to the p plus 1 over 8
to the p plus--
and then up until the last term.
And now I can write this
as 1 plus the sum from l
equals 1 to k, so the number
of blocks I have here.
and now, the terms that
come in each of these
blocks 1 over into the p.
And so now I estimate 1 over
n not from below by this guy,
but from above by
putting in the smallest n
that n is in this block.
So this is less than
or equal to 1 plus sum
from l equals 1 to k sum from
n equals 2 to the l minus 1
plus 1, 2 to the l 1
over 2 to the l minus 1
plus 1 raised to the p-th power.
Now this plus 1 is just making
things bigger on the bottom,
so if I remove it,
I've made things bigger
overall for this fraction.
So this is less than
or equal to sum from 1
equals l equals 1 to k, sum n
equals 2 to the l minus 1, 2
the l times 1 over 2 to
the p times l minus 1.
And now this thing
here, if we do
the same algebra we
did a minute ago,
this is equal to
1 l equals 1 to k.
Now I have this term coming out.
And then the number
of terms I have here,
just like I did for the harmonic
series, this is equal to 2
to the l minus 2 to the
l minus 1 plus 1 plus 1.
And now this is equal to 1
plus sum from l equals 1 to k.
And so this whole thing here
is equal to 2 to the l minus 1.
So I get 2 to the minus
p minus 1 l minus 1.
Now I can shift this index.
Actually, I guess I could
have made that sharper
but it doesn't matter.
I could shift this index l by--
no.
So l starts at 1 and goes to k.
And here, I have
the sum l minus 1.
So I can shift this
index to go from now l
equals 0 to k minus 1, 2
to the minus p minus 1 l.
So this is like making
a change of variables,
l prime equals l minus 1.
And so let me put l
prime instead of l.
So p is bigger than
1, so this corresponds
to a geometric series now.
So let me actually rewrite this
as 1 over 2 to the p minus 1
to the l prime.
When p is bigger than 1, then
1 over 2 to the p minus 1
is less than 1.
So this thing is a k
minus 1 partial sum
for the geometric
series with this
as R. So this is always
bounded above by--
if I add up all the terms,
which equals that thing that I
have up there, 1 over 1 minus
2 to the minus p minus 1.
So that proves that
along this subsequence,
these partial sums are
bounded by this fixed number.
And now I claim that this
proves that the whole sequence
of partial sums is bounded,
in fact, by the same number.
For all m, a natural
number, s m is less than
or equal to this number again--
1 minus 2 to the
minus p minus 1.
So let m be a natural
number, so we're
trying to prove this bound.
What do we do?
We find a dyadic number,
a number of the form 2
to the k bigger than m.
And since 2 to the
m is bigger than m--
I think that's maybe
one of the first things
we did by induction--
we get that s sub m--
which is the partial sum
of non-negative
terms-- this is going
to be less than or
equal to, since this
is a monotone increasing guy,
this is going to be less than
or equal s to the 2m,
which is less than
or equal to 1 plus 1 minus
2 to the minus p minus 1.
Thus, the sequence
of partial sums
is bounded, which implies
this series converges.
And that's the end of the proof,
and I think we'll stop there.